From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroth. This is the daily.
[Music]
A little over a week after the flooding
in central Texas, the death toll has
reached more than 130 with the search
continuing for the missing.
In the aftermath of the disaster, there
have been mounting questions about how
local officials handled the critical
hours before and during the storm.
Today, we look at what we now know about
the missed opportunities that may have
contributed to the growing tragedy and
whether anything more could have been
done to save lives.
[Music]
It's Tuesday, July 15th.
Now, we're going to show you radar here
in just a second. I do want to get you
caught up on the flood watch in case you
are just now joining us here.
>> On July 3rd, the National Weather
Service and local meteorologists started
tracking the possibility of an evening
storm developing over the Texas Hill
Country.
>> We look out west, doesn't look like
much, these tiny little specks on radar,
but to me that's really pretty telling.
This is the potential seeds, if you
will, for thunderstorms to fill in this
evening.
>> The conditions looked ripe for the
chance of overnight flooding.
>> And then notice the tendency to just
sort of sit and train over the same
area, if you will. Bandaraa, Medina
County, maybe Kerr County right into
tomorrow morning. That is a signal of
localized flash flooding in parts of our
area. But in a river corridor long known
as flash flood alley, the weather
reports didn't prompt people to change
their plans. Hundreds of campers were in
session at Camp Mystic, a Christian
girls camp, and families gathered along
the Guadalupe River to celebrate the
July 4th weekend.
>> Those days were beautiful. Weather was
nice, a little bit of rain, the sun. You
know how it is in Texas, beautiful
weather, and you get to walk along the
river with my sister and enjoy the
atmosphere. And she's like, "Oh my god,
Nick." My colleagues Ang Lee and Thomas
Fuller interviewed a 57year-old man
named Nicholas Paneayu who had just
moved his new RV to the Blue Oak RV Park
near the river.
>> The rain's coming down pretty hard and I
was familiar that this place has a
tendency to flood a little bit, but I
wasn't aware of what was coming. So,
>> Nicholas started to notice that the rain
was coming down really hard around
midnight.
>> The rain was coming down and when it
hits the top of the RV, it is it is
loud. It is a it is a nightmare storm in
there. And at 1:14 a.m. the National
Weather Service sent out its first flash
flood warning to residents cell phones.
The alert called the flood risk quote
considerable, but the area is remote
with spotty cell service. And Nicholas
said the first time he noticed an alert
was a little after 4:00 a.m.
>> It was saying that there's a flood a
flood warning. Don't leave your
situation unless you're being flooded.
And there's a flood warning till 7:00
a.m.
>> By then, the river was already rising.
Nicholas opened the door of his RV,
shined a flashlight toward the
Guadalupe, and saw a father holding a
child under each arm.
>> His wife was nearby.
>> Babies,
>> I hear the mom screaming. What did they
say? Uh, what were they?
>> Oh my god. Please help. Please help. And
as soon as I saw them, I started
screaming out loud. Help. People are
dying. I knew immediately. I knew
immediately people are dying out here.
Please help. People are dying. And
nobody could hear anything. Nothing. One
gentleman,
>> the river had more than doubled in
height and was moving fast.
>> It was fast. It was powerful. It was
rising and it was in motion. It was a It
was It was an entity onto its own.
>> As the water rushed around him, Nicholas
said he couldn't reach the family.
>> I collapsed into the water.
>> He said he watched the man and his two
children disappear into the river.
>> Yes. When I when I was looking at that
baby, the other baby was under his other
arm underwater. I saw his shoulder. I
didn't see him anymore. I just saw the
baby, but his arm was around the baby.
He didn't let go.
>> The baby was the last thing I saw.
>> Nicholas himself was then swept into the
water where he eventually caught hold of
a metal pole and found his way to higher
ground.
[Music]
The river is completely swollen and
there is a car with occupants in it
floating down the river. Ma'am,
>> at 4:22 a.m., a firefighter down the
river in Hunt near Camp Mystic asked on
an emergency channel to send an alert
out to local residents on code red, a
private security alert system. Is there
any way we can send a code red out to
our hunt residents asking them to find
higher ground or stay home?
>> 104 standby. We have to get that
approved with our supervisor.
>> But it was at least an hour before
anyone received the first code red
warning.
By morning, Nicholas had lost at least
28 of his neighbors. 27 people were
killed at Camp Mystic, including many
campers and their director.
Everyone here, if we could have warned
them, we would have done so. And we
didn't even have a warning. We did not
know.
>> In their first interviews with the
press, as crews searched the flood zone
for survivors, local officials answered
questions about what they knew and when
they knew it.
>> I individually did not receive a
warning.
>> The mayor of Kurville was asleep for
much of the storm.
>> When I woke up, when I was I got a call
from the city manager, I got up. What
time was that?
>> Oh goodness, 5:30ish.
I can look on my phone at about 5:30ish.
>> The sheriff said he was alerted hours
after the storm began. The city manager
was also unaware and was in fact out for
a jog around the time the flooding began
to intensify.
>> I was running the river trail at 3:00
a.m. this morning just cuz I'm that guy
and there was no signs of it. The rain
was here um on the river trail which is
down below at the water's edge at 3:30
and 4:00 when I left. There was no signs
of it rising at that point.
Texas Department of Emergency Management
put out an all call and said there's
going to be a problem. We knew there
were there was going to be a problem.
Why weren't these camps evacuated?
>> I can't answer that.
>> Well, you're the judge. I mean, you're
the top official here in this county.
Why can't you answer that? There are
kids missing. These camps were in harm's
way. We knew this flood was coming.
>> We didn't know this flood was coming.
Rest assured, no one knew this kind of
flood was coming. We have floods all the
time. This is the most dangerous river
valley in the United States.
>> I agree.
>> And we and we deal with floods on a
regular basis. When it rains, we get
water. We had no reason to believe that
this was going to be any anything that
was happening. None whatsoever.
The local officials all talked about how
little time they had to respond and the
county judge said there needed to be
better communication in the valley.
>> Can you talk to us about what kind of
warning system might have been in place
last night just to make sure that
everybody got out safely?
>> We do not have a warning system.
>> Thank you everybody for being here. But
during his own press conference, Texas
Governor Greg Abbott rejected questions
about accountability and he cast doubt
on the idea that anything officials
could have done would have led to a
different outcome.
>> Ask, I'm going to use your words. Who's
to blame? Know this, that's the word
choice of losers. The way winners talk
is not to point fingers. They talk about
solutions. That same message was echoed
by President Trump on his visit to the
area. Several
>> families we've heard from are obviously
upset because they say that those
warnings, those alerts didn't go out out
in time and they also say that people
could have been saved. What do you say
to those families?
>> Well, I think everyone did an incredible
job under the circumstances. This was, I
guess Christie said, a one in 500, one
in a thousand years. And uh I just have
admiration for the job that everybody
did. There was just admiration. Uh the
uh only a bad person would ask a
question like that to be honest with
you. I don't know who you are, but only
a very evil person would ask a question
like that.
After the break, we speak to my
colleague Christopher Fll about the
missteps that led up to the tragedy and
why it matters to figure out what went
wrong.
We'll be right back.
Chris, we just heard local officials
essentially say that the timing and the
force of this storm overwhelmed them,
that nothing could have been done given
the tools that they had. We want to talk
to you about why that is. Why in a place
that is known as flash flood alley were
officials not prepared to deal with an
event like this? Tell us what you found.
We should start by acknowledging there's
a lot of truth to that. These are really
intense flood events, right? And even in
a perfect scenario with perfect
planning, with great policies, with lots
of funding, even if everything goes
perfectly, protecting people from this
kind of really intense flooding is very
difficult,
>> right? But at the same time, there are a
range of actions that American officials
at all levels of government have
developed over decades that don't seem
to have been applied very well in this
situation.
>> And it's at least worth talking about
the things in the leadup to this event
that don't seem to have gone as well as
they could have and might have made a
difference.
>> Okay, let's talk about those things.
Where should we start?
>> You know, every disaster, as FEMA is
fond of saying, is first and foremost a
local issue. Let's start locally. This
is an area of the country famously prone
to flooding. And the first thing, the
most important thing with flooding is
where are the people to start with?
Where are the people you're worried
about? In this case, the kids who are in
Camp Mystic.
>> Sure. And as we now know, a lot of those
structures were in what FEMA calls not
just the flood plane, but the flood way.
>> And and by structures, Chris, you mean
the cabins where the kids were sleeping,
>> right? The first time I became aware of
some of these cabins being in the flood
way was just a few days after the flood
when I started reporting this story and
I was on the phone with a former FEMA
official who knows this stuff really
well and he said you know Chris before
we go on let me just pause. I want to
look at the flood map. I want to see
where these structures were. I said
okay. And he went silent for a bit and
he said I can't believe what I'm seeing.
This is wild. I said what is it? He
said, "It looks like some of these
buildings were in the flood way. That is
so dangerous."
>> And hearing it in his voice made me
realize this isn't some sort of
technical issue that just flood nerds
care about. That was when I realized
there's something really remarkable
about the level of exposure that these
buildings faced. You're saying that this
isn't like a borderline issue that these
cabins were in a really dangerous area.
It's just like plainly obvious to this
expert you're talking to,
>> right? A fundamental rule of flood
mitigation is you don't want people
living and sleeping in the floodway. And
if you do, it's pretty dangerous.
>> So, what do we know about how these
buildings wind up being constructed in a
floodway? So, a lot of the buildings
around the US predate these flood maps
and are in these really high-risisk
areas. So, my guess is a lot of these
buildings would have predated the maps
and so people just didn't know at the
time. And the result is buildings that
existed before the flood maps are called
grandfathered. They sort of get to
sidestep the rules,
>> right?
>> But my colleague Mike Baker also noted
that stuff happened since those flood
maps, including renovations. So, it's
not clear whether and to what degree the
camp had sort of the opportunity to try
to relocate some of these structures out
of the flood plane.
>> Also, we now know that a little more
than a decade ago, the camp and the
county asked FEMA for a change to these
maps that would withdraw or remove some
of these buildings from the flood map. M
>> sometimes it's the case that property
owners or local officials will say to
FEMA, "Hey, there's a mistake here. We
think that you've identified this flood
risk that isn't actually there." But as
we know, these properties faced a really
high flood risk. So it does raise the
question among many questions that have
to be investigated. Why did FEMA remove
some of these structures from the flood
plane? And did that cause the camp or
local officials to sort of reduce the
level of risk that they thought applied
to these properties?
>> And we asked FEMA over the weekend why
they would do that, what the case was
for changing the flood maps. FEMA did
not answer that question in any direct
or meaningful way. So until we get more
information about why FEMA agreed to do
that, it's hard to conclude what really
happened there.
>> Wow. So despite this area being known as
we said as flash flood alley, FEMA
removed some of the Camp Mystic
buildings here from the official flood
maps which may have reduced the level of
risk being considered.
>> Right.
>> The why behind that does seem like a
pretty critical piece of missing
information. But beyond the question of
why these structures were here in the
first place, I want to turn to why
people weren't aware of how much danger
they were in in the moment as the flood
was happening. What did you find out
about that?
>> There's two answers there, right? The
the first answer to that question is
climate change. You just defined climate
change, right? An area that's always had
a flooding problem, all of a sudden,
seemingly out of nowhere, gets a flood
that is worse than people anticipated,
worse than they remember happening
before. And people struggle to even
understand even once it's happened,
right?
>> That is what climate change looks like.
But we have systems to deal with that.
And arguably the most important is the
National Weather Service,
>> right? And in my reporting on this
storm, one of the first things I looked
at was, well, what was their staffing
like? The National Weather Service, like
so many federal agencies, has lost a lot
of people since President Trump came
back into office. And I wanted to know,
did that affect their performance? And
the answer to that is actually a little
bit complicated.
>> What do you mean?
>> The weather service has one core job,
right? That's the one everyone thinks
about, which is their job is to track,
forecast, and predict weather events so
people can make plans and react to them.
By every account, the weather service
did well on that count with these
storms. They began issuing warnings at a
reasonable amount of time in advance
>> and began issuing evacuation notices
saying, "Get to high ground once the
weather data substantiated those
warnings." But what I think people don't
appreciate is that isn't all the weather
service does. They also have positions
designed to coordinate with local
emergency staff and make plans for what
to do really for precisely this kind of
scenario. Right? When you get a
life-threatening storm and flash
flooding developing overnight, starting
at sort of 11:00 p.m. at midnight,
>> you really want to have plans in place
beforehand that are tightly rehearsed
and make sure that there's people on the
ground who have some idea of what to do
if that happens. Those are some of the
positions that were vacant in the two
weather offices that had responsibility
for this storm. Now look, these offices
had some vacancies six months ago before
this current administration, but the
number of vacancies roughly doubled
since then.
>> Wow. Just give me an example of some of
the positions that were missing so we
understand what we're talking about
here.
>> Yeah. For example, the weather services
Angelo office was missing a senior
hydraologist, a staff forecaster, and a
meteorologist in charge. sort of a
senior official
>> in the San Antonio office, which also
had jurisdiction over some of these
floods. They were missing a warning
coordination meteorologist and a science
officer.
>> Sounds important.
>> Really important jobs. And that warning
coordination meteorologist, it turns
out, took the early retirement offer
that been pushed by the Trump
administration. So having all those
positions vacant in what turned out to
be these crucial offices at this crucial
moment, would it have made a difference
otherwise? We don't know, but it
definitely didn't help.
>> The other issue that officials pointed
to when they're asked about their
response that night was that there was
no siren system in place. They said the
mayor of Kurville, for example, said he
first learned about the storm when he's
woken up at 5:30 with a phone call. So,
what do we know about that? Why does an
area with this high risk of flooding and
with spotty cell service not have some
kind of early warning system in place?
>> You know, you put your finger on what
struck me initially as a real mystery.
These systems aren't that expensive. The
county estimated they could have gotten
one for less than a million dollars.
They're in use and they seem to have
made a difference elsewhere. And this is
in a state that has lots of grant money
for projects like this. And in fact,
Texas has gotten more of that federal
money for disaster preparation than
almost any other state. We checked the
federal data on this. Texas has gotten
about 1.9 billion dollar over the last
decade in just one FEMA disaster
reduction program. So, it wasn't
immediately clear why the county
wouldn't have been able to get money to
pay for that.
>> So, what happened here? I mean, it
sounds like there is a pot of money to
be had. Why doesn't any of it end up in
Kirk County?
>> Yeah, in hindsight, it seems like a
series of missed opportunities. The
county went to the Texas Division of
Emergency Management in 2017 seeking
money and at the time the state said
that this application didn't meet
federal requirements including a
requirement to have a plan for
addressing natural disasters which the
county I guess didn't at the time.
>> They tried again a year later trying to
get some of the money that rushed into
Texas after Hurricane Harvey and they
were told no. And then finally last
year, a different body within the county
called the Upper Guadalupe River
Authority went to yet another Texas
state body, the Texas Water Development
Board, again seeking a grant for about a
million dollars to do this. And this
time they were told, "We can give you a
grant for 5% of the cost and we can loan
you the rest of the money with 0%
interest." But the river authority said,
"We can't make that work. That's not
enough for us." So, three times they
tried and three times it didn't work
out.
>> It's remarkable to hear obviously in the
aftermath of what happened that the
county was trying to do this. They've
identified a risk and they're actively
pursuing the avenues that are available
to address it.
>> Yeah, there's an element of of foresight
here that struck me as almost chilling.
Last fall, the county released a very,
very detailed plan, 220 pages, looking
at all the risks the county could face
and what to do about it. And one of them
was indeed noting that they faced a very
significant flood risk and even
predicting that there was in their view
a likely chance of flooding within the
next year.
>> Wow.
>> And they noted that one thing to do
about it was install a warning system.
So the county was remarkably precient at
gauging the risk they faced. So they did
their job. They correctly thought
through their risks. They gauged those
risks. They come up with plans to
address those risks. They tried to get
money to pay for those plans. And none
of it worked.
Just to step back for a moment, Chris,
how do you diagnose what's at the root
of what went wrong here? Because we're
talking about these well-intentioned
efforts to prevent something like this
from happening. We have a federal
government that makes a bunch of money
available to the state, a county that
applies for it, that says outright,
"We're at risk of a huge flood." But
somehow all of these things don't align
in a way that actually leads to the
things that need to be done to mitigate
the kind of tragedy that we saw. How do
you make sense of that?
>> So I think the most satisfying thing
would be to say this person or this
office or this level of government
screwed up and it's on them. And the
reality is both more complicated and
more frustrating. Right? So you've got
this incredibly diffuse system where
really everyone has some degree of
responsibility,
>> but as you learn covering government
when everyone is responsible, really no
one is responsible. So it seems like
things failed across the board.
>> How do you think about fixing that
issue, Chris? You've covered this a long
time. It seems like everybody would want
taxpayer dollars to be flowing to the
right places, but it's not totally
working. So, what would work?
>> So, FEMA is aware that though they've
been putting more and more money into
these programs, it hasn't always gotten
to the communities that need it the
most. Part of that is the way the
programs are built. They tend to be
competitive grant programs where if
you're a county or a city and you've got
a risk, you've got to write an
application and hope that application is
scored highly enough that you win the
money. Sure. And it tends to be places
with lots of risk are also often rural
communities that might not have the
money to hire lots of grant writers or
the staff to think through what grants
to apply for in the first place. FEMA in
the last administration under Joe Biden
began trying to sort of more proactively
go out to communities and say, "Hey,
you've identified this problem. You
haven't been able to get some money. We
want to help. We'll try to guide you
through the process." That was moving
slowly, but it seemed like a promising
idea. The Trump administration seems to
have backed away from that and they've
eliminated one of the main programs that
made this money available and they've
cut back on the staff to help play that
role.
>> So absent that sort of proactive
outreach from FEMA to go around the
country and look for places with the
highest risk, it isn't clear how you fix
it. Right? President Trump has talked
about making FEMA different in some way
and giving these functions back to the
state and local community. I haven't
heard anyone with this administration
explain what their approach is to making
sure that money better gets the people
who need it, but it's a long-standing
problem and FEMA has not nailed it yet.
You're describing this system where
responsibility is so spread out among
many people and we heard Governor Abbott
of Texas say that blaming people,
pointing the finger is just unhelpful.
That's not what winning teams do. But I
know there are families asking this
question and searching for answers to
just how this could have happened. Like
it's a natural thing to do when you've
lost so much, right?
Right. The overwhelming
takeaway from my reporting on disasters
like this for the last decade or so is
the system that's designed to protect
people doesn't work that well. And so
you could accept the notion that the
blame game isn't useful. Okay. But what
probably is useful and probably doesn't
happen enough in this country is asking
about the systematic failures that go
behind this that cause a place like Kirk
County with really clearly defined risks
that has taken the trouble to figure out
what the solution could be has sought
money for that solution couldn't get it
and then this happened
>> right
>> that seems like it ought to be an
occasion to say well what do we do about
the other places like this right and if
you don't talk about why this happened.
You can't figure out how to make the
system work better. So the bigger
question I think from my reporting is
are there systematic things that went
wrong here and can be improved so that
this kind of thing happens less often in
other parts of the country.
[Music]
>> Chris, thanks for being here.
>> Sure thing.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know.
Today,
>> we've made a deal today where we are
going to be sending them weapons and
they're going to be paying for them. At
an Oval Office meeting with NATO
Secretary General, President Trump said
he would send top-of-the-line weapons to
Ukraine through NATO countries, which
would foot the bill.
>> And I'm disappointed in President Putin
because I thought we would have had a
deal 2 months ago, but it doesn't seem
to get there.
>> He also said he would slap very severe
tariffs on Russia if there was no peace
deal with Ukraine within 50 days and
threatened to impose levies on countries
that did business with Russia. The
announcement was an escalation in
Trump's response to Russia over its
invasion of Ukraine and was a sign of
how frustrated the president has become
with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
And in a significant victory for Trump
on Monday, the Supreme Court said the
administration could proceed with its
plans to fire more than a thousand
workers at the education department. The
decision paves the way for the
dismantling of the education department,
which manages federal loans for college,
tracks student achievement, and enforces
civil rights laws in schools. The
administration has announced its
intention to fire more than 1,300
workers from the department, which along
with other cuts would leave it with a
workforce half as big as it was when
Trump took office. The court's order
comes after a decision by the justices
last week that cleared the way for the
administration to move forward with
cutting thousands of jobs across a
number of federal agencies including the
departments of housing and urban
development, state and treasury.
Today's episode was produced by Asta
Chhaturved, Alex Stern, and Diana Wyn
with help from Caitlyn O'Keefe and Mary
Wilson. It was edited by Mike Benois,
Patricia Willins, and Liz O Balin. Fact
checked by Susan Lee. Contains original
music by Dan Pal and Alicia Eup. And was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly. Special thanks to
Ang Lee, Thomas Fuller, Mike Baker,
Emily Cochran, Edgar Sandaval, Danny
Hum, and Ruth Graham.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitawa. See you tomorrow.
[Music]